Italian Journey
Gillian Rose (1947-1995)
Shared by the literary executor Howard Caygill on gillianrose.org under CC BY-NC-ND 4.0. OCR of the estate scan; reproduced non-commercially with attribution.
Source: https://gillianrose.org/gillian-rose-unpublished-writings/

Italian Journey © 1995 by Gillian Rose is licensed under CC BY-NC-ND 4.0 (cc) O26)
You may reproduce it for non-commercial use if you attribute the source. BR, he mn 3
VY

+ oNG Mo

This document has been made available with the permission of Howard
Caygill, literary executor, on behalf of the Estate of the late Gillian Rose

4th-8th September 1995

London to Siena to Portofino

Sunday 3rd September : Leamington

Leslie's 84th birthday : thanksgiving.

8.30am __It is a bright, heavenly, still morning - why ever leave? I see a
shadow I've never seen before : the tall lampshade on the green
settee. The absence of environing traffic and no wind give the
day, the new month, a great blessing. September is a threshold
month, an intelligent month, with its mingle of the seasons. We

are going to prolong the summer.

Two ways in which even the preparation for a holiday exceeds
the calibration of the ordinary : more time for light-hearted
conviviality and frivolity and - more time for prayer. Lighter and
deeper. “Contemplation” as Dostoevsky says, i.e. not distancing
reflection, but absorption, may link the two - the world around,
the world within. This is what I must practice (leave the critical

attitude behind, on my desks).

I would be worried to disturb the stillness, the silence, of this

@) day. Hush, hush - departure.
/

No 387 Everyman’s Library 1941 (1909) James Boswell (Ernest
Rhys (ed.) The Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides with Samuel
Johnson.

10.30 am __ It is still so quiet I can hear the scraping of my pen : very

reassuring (a busy-insect sound).

Four brothers Karamazov:

Dimitri )
Ivan )
Alexei (Alyosha) )
Smerdyakov )

Fyodorovitch

Monday 4th September

We have so many melancholy poets:

Johnson
Keats
Coleridge
Hopkins (?)

Park Hotel, Siena

We arrived at 4.30 pm.

I am Miss Rose. Who is she? A haughty girl in pigtails and a pinafore, ora

lady spinster fading genteely from lack of libido?

The rooms are deep cerulean blue and gold with four poster beds and

chaises longues. Lynn and I have a stately connecting door and a view of

the cathedral tower and dome - the white and black horizontal striations

brought right up to our immense windows by the binoculars.

Goats milk ice cream...

Fruit soup with horseradish!

The image of the pearl : nacreous sheen formed around undigested grit is
not apt for an precarious human being: for pearls are tough (even though

they discolour).

“Pour me into bed”, says Lynn.

We pray for a few minutes in the chapel: one candle lights the way. Every

room is vaulted with cusped vaults on the four sides.

Praise and thanksgiving for everything (whether in the suitcase or left

behind).

Maybe we are all a mix of emotional intelligence and emotional stupidity.
James Boswell’s Journal males me chortle from time to time. I must find an
example. Is it low-brow to prefer his account (which seems to incorporate
Johnson's) to Johnson’s more anthropological/ethnographical investigations
(land-tenure, economy, kinship, marriage-customs, class relations,

superstitions)? Boswell’s narrative includes all the conversations with their

unlimited range of preoccupations, and it gives you Johnson as ornery

animal and as Socrates.

Tuesday 5th September

Mist over Siena and the surrounding hills. The Park Hotel is one mile north-
west commanding a panoramic view of the city (I can see the Mangia Tower

in the Campo, too).

The colour of the Campo is muted, ancient pallor by comparison with
terracotta expectations - of course, it is an overcast day, and by midday it is
raining (I wish spelling were as flexible as in Mallory’s time. Was spelling

standardized between Mallory and Shakespeare?)

There are no windows at the level of the piers in the Cathedral but massive
paintings along the aisles. The horizontal green-black marble striping of the
massive nave piers give the Cathedral an Egyptian look (Lynn), a pagan
temple to the popes clustered above the piers on the cornice above the nave.
The Hermes Trismestigus pavement is covered with spongy cardboard: but it
is almost impossible to make out the other floor mosaics because it is so
dark. No clerestory windows either but areole windows. The inside of the
dome forms a steep cone painted bright blue with golden stars - the

presbytery is closed off.

The west facade is covered in pink as well as white and green-black marble,
with hosts of sculpture - heads of cherubs, free-standing saints, apostles,
prophets. Scenes of the Virgin painted on the pediment cusps. The tower

with its ascending scale of mullioned windows, one to five.

We walk around the right of the Cathedral past the gigantic, unfinished
brick frame for the New Cathedral, past the Museum and debouch
unexpectedly on a vertiginously steep flight of stone stairs (later we see a
toddler in blue and green mount all the way up the stairs without stopping).
Another black and white building seems to have grown out of the myriad
levels of the stairway. San Giovanni Square - the Baptistery with three
portals. Inside it is well lit, shallow and longitudinal with the famous font in
the centre with Donatello’s “Herod’s Banquet”. The frescoes are the thing -
the vaults and walls covered with scenes in brilliant colours - different reds,
blues, greens, strips of stones, inlays and cusps invite you to sit and
contemplate the heavenly feast. There are two side altars: the space as a
whole offers its riches and its peace, whereas the Cathedral withheld them -

without even a saving chiaroscura.

The steepness and angles of the streets between the Campo and the
Cathedral make it worthwhile to keep looking back over one’s shoulder: to

see palaces splayed out and moving around corners.

I am caught out in belligerent stubbornness : concerning whether there is
air-conditioning in our rooms.

HeteL
The Park retains an aristocratic caution: no shops or selling, the chapel and
seventeenth-century portraits instead. The peach stuccoed outer walls are
open on one long side,so, as you climb the hill the villa looks like a triptych,
the dark brown (siena?) shutters the brooding eyes of the Madonna guarding

the valley.

My legs hurt in three places : the ankles (right worse), backs of the knees,
left thigh and hip sore all the time, painful to put fresh weight on, acutely so
to bend or to rise from bending. Both knees and thighs massively swollen.
New puffiness central right abdomen (in addition to fleshy pouches lower

central abdomen).

Wednesday 6th September

The mist is dazzling this morning - like the raiment of the Transfiguration.

Praise, Thanksgiving.

The Simone Martini Majesty Fresco, even restored, has a dream-like quality
because although the assembly is installed with all the trappings of pomp
and glory - golden throne, wide canopy, twenty medallions in the frame,

attendance, offerings and obeisance of angels, saints and prophets - yet the

om

intent heads float above weightless bodies (the luxuriant textiles, reduced to

turquoise outer rims around abdominal cavities).

Lorenzetti’s Good Government and the Effects of the Good Government in the
town and countryside. The old king dressed in sienese white and black
needs a hoot of females to represent the virtues (Lynn). Tyranny looks like a
devil, with her feet on a black goat (Bad Government), and is said to be a
female also. The Effects of Bad Government is almost completely effaced.
Under Justice, Concord is roped to the scales of Justice and has a heavy
rectangular plane across her knees and a crowd of suitors all of whose
ambitions she levels. Martint’s Guidoriccio de Fogliano or Guido Riccio (see
postcard) between the castles of Montemassif: and Sassoforte of Maremma by
contrast (1328) has great solidity. Horse and knight caparisoned in
matching gold and black diamonds, they enter eternally the palisade of their
destination castle on the left, while the castle and camp left behind seem to

decamp, forming part of their retinue and bodyguard.

Lynn is overwhelmed by a Massacre of the Innocents in the Hall of Pillars.
Highly stylized in viciousness and innocence, the painting shows the
murdered babes ligning the bottom frame, while older children watch
nonchalantly from a safe acade above. Over coffee I suggest that Lynn
develop a light carapace, or at least recognize that she has chosen to remain

aH
raw, that good intentions can be masked by irony, humour, Machiévellian

smiles, in a way that is more likely to ensure their effectivity, their

indestructibility, than endless brutal sincerity.

Lunch is the finest, most ethereal pizza, bare flakes of dough, with

anchovies and capers. Forget American ice-cream with this chocolate,

vanilla, lemon sorbet. In spite of drinking red wine, Lynn heroically marches

off and reappears pronto with a taxi for the one with elephantine legs. I feel

much better than I did after our time in the Palazzo Publicio when I had a

miserable vision of what it would be like not to have sufficient energy or

strength to lead an independent life. Fortunately, one little espresso

dissolved such forebodings. And now (3.10 pm), I shall rest again.

4.00 pm

The view down the opposite valley is amazingly clear - a
miniature hillscape on the other side of flat-roofed villas, nestled
among neat orchards, terraces of olive trees, and noble,

lanceolate cypress trees.

John Wain’s biography of Johnson, fine as it is, I find
profoundly annoying. His argument, presupposition, prejudice,
explicitly expressed, is that Johnson deposited in his spiritual
and religious torments his unease and terror at his tempestuous
sexuality. That he failed to marry for the second time, even
though he had several eligible relationships - women he
respected, was even in awe of, intellectually, and felt most

tenderly towards - he never managed to bring together the

sexual and the ethical, but left his emotional turmoil to prayer
and to God (except for his exploitation of Mrs. Thrale, his

emotional dependency on her and his negligence of her distress).

The common assumption is that spiritual - religious life bears
the brunt of unresolved psychic conflict: God as the eros we
deny or dampen in our sexual relations. It is the other way
round : we manage to produce erotic and sexual situations and
relationships which express our unresolved relationship to God.
In choice of partner, in perverse connections tolerated far
beyond the good, in recognizably repeated patterns of love
affairs, we act out the battle of inner demons which we cannot
face in solitude and in prayer. (This is not to deny that we grow
through bondings, discovering our otherwise hidden difficulties

in their histories).

Note: I am implicitly distinguishing between the empirical,
specific, contingent, ‘religious’, relation or, indeed, non-relation

to God and THE RELATION TO GOD.

Three wispy angel-clouds hold up the canopy of the pale blue
sky, a peachy one, a snow-white one and a grey-robed one.
There are olive, orange and lemon trees in the hotel park. I have

a hard, acid green olive on my writing table gleaned by Lynn.

he’
a

Thursday 7th September

The cool September continues.

We had Parma ham and melon and pecorino cheese for breakfast in a third
dining room with dark sixteenth-century portraits on the walls. At 10 am
we are to be driven to San Gimignano, Tuscan hill town, forty minutes to the

north west of Siena.

This will have been a perfect day.

50 minutes to San Gimignano through the Tuscan hills. Fields of withered,
woeful sunflowers (as throughout Burgundy), their scorched heads drooping,
submissive to some invisible power that seems to refuse their harvest of oil (I
wish I knew the principles of sunflower horticulture); or are they trying, like
the giant Antaeus, to touch the earth and so regain their strength and

vigour?

In 1300 Dante came to San Gimignano to persuade the Mayor and the
General Council of the necessity of a Guelph League in Tuscany. The
chamber of the Mayor’s New House where he delivered his address is called
“Dante's Hall”. It is dominated by a second Maesta (Majesty 1317), painted
by Lippo Memni, Simone Martini’s brother-in-law. It is clearly a copy:

figures effaced in the Siena Majesty are fully characterized here. Yet it is

10

entirely different : the Virgin, also in pale turquoise, looms out of all her
frames (canopy, steps, throne), while her companions-in-eternity display
gravitas and glory by comparison with the ethereal grace of the Sienese

version.

San Gimignano is renowned for its thirteen square bell-towers. The Tuscan
Romanesque of the Collegiate Church or Cathedral, like the Church of St.
Augustine, present honey-stoned barge-like exteriors, punctured only by
very small circular windows (there are four narrow Gothic windows towards
the east end on the right side at St. Augustine’s), yet somehow they seem to
have achieved the Gothic elimination of the wall. The exterior uniformity is
obliterated by the entire covering of the aisles walls - the Collegiate church
with frescoes - the Old Testament by Bartola di Fredi; the New Testament

by Barna da Siena (14th century).

In the Museum in the Mayor’s New House there is a crucifixion by Coppo di
Marcovaldo, who may have been Cimabue’s teacher. It is remarkable for
Christ’s luxuriant brown (siena?) hair and beard, the contrapposto of his
head jammed into the neck, the long high-lighted nose meeting the full
parting lips, elongated eyes surmounted by thick brown eye-brows, the swirl
of the cheeks, the longitudinal rib-cage with the vertical sword wound

flanked by six pouches of proud flesh....

11

The guide book refers to it as a “dramatic representation of a tormenting and
violent feeling”. Lynn affirms this as the violence of Christ’s executioners. I
see it as the violence of the crucifixion - divine violence to save human
violence. We discuss the meaning of “glory” after seeing Pintuiccio’s
Madonna in Glory, and the Saints Gregory and Benedict where the Madonna
sits in an ogive circle with a shell-like interior, cherub-angel heads with
wings for collars around the outer blue rim and under two pink feet

protruding from her blue vestments:

Lynn thinks “glory” means “wonder” or “awe”. I think that it does not have a
subjective, anthropological meaning (“the glory of the Lord”). I conjecture
that “glory” means the manifestation of God in the world, the work of the
Holy Spirit. “Glory” is puzzling because it has a trinitarian resonance. St.
Augustine was warned by the “Baby Jesus” : “It is easier to pour the waters

of the sea into a puddle” than to grasp the mystery of the Holy Trinity.

We find a perfect place to have lunch in Via dell’Oro, between the Piazza
Duomo and Piazza Cisterne. Ristorante Dorando specializes in old Tuscan
dishes. It comprises three small halls with vaulted ceilings and stone walls.
We start with Cibréo de Medici, Catherine’s favourite dish, of chicken liver,
followed by Florentine steak. It must have been a pound of thick, succulent

meat, seared on the outside and pink inside, with oil and lemon. The menu

12

tells us of the Etruscan esteem for the ducks they hunted - since ducks are
able to abscond by the three elements of water, air and earth, avoiding the
arrows by swimming, flying or walking. Children used to be punished by
being deprived of fruit to end their meal. Jams were made by peasants to
eat with “stinginess” during the long and cold winters when they could

afford no fresh fruit.

Finally we wait in the Square of St. Augustine for three quarters of an hour
for the church to open. I especially want to see the Bonozzo Gozzelis cycle of
frescoes depicting incidents from the life of St. Augustine. In particular I am
curious how St. Monica, his mother, will be represented. The frescoes are in
the sanctuary behind the altar : it seems intrusive to penetrate there, but
notices encourage visitors to do so. The church is thronged with the

rn cedsanty y
curious; heaving banging does not cease for the restoration of St.
Bartholomew's Chapel, yet the ehurel-hag the combined aura of business

as prewl S

and holiness of a church very much in use - in reception and in action). In
number 10 among the seventeen pictures of St. Augustine, Augustine reads
the Epistle of Paul in the presence of his friend Alipio. This pivotal moment
(Bk 4 of the Confessions) when Augustine turns from friend and fiancée to
confession is presented here as inclusive. It makes me muse on how

different his path and the Latin tradition might have been ... Monica wears

the blues of the Virgin; she is monumental.

13

LL

Sitting in the back of a chauffeur-driven car, Lynn, inveterate driver, is
tense, clutching her handbag. This is the weakness of her strength: “I am a
doer” she says. O dear! She is travelling with a contemplative with strong
anchorite leanings. Well, we should complement each other - for she will do;
and I, I will ponder. Lynn has humour - from the bawdy to the simply
hysterical - Iam a poor companion there too. I have irony. Holy irony - in
the sense of the divine comedy; : the awe-ful discrepancy between human
ambition and eternal truth; but also, I must confess, intellectual irony -
that sinful distance which dissolves sentiment into paradox, a form of
supercilious, hypercritical, devilish relish at plan emotion and naive concern
(which, of course, also have their manipulative motive).

It has been a perfect day. (Did Winnie ever get to simplify her future

perfect?)

Friday 8th September

Two ‘small’ episodes of petit mal - one in the night; second just after rising -
third in the shower - two at breakfast, one in the foyer. The terror is largely
that these ‘episodes’ bring me to the limit of se ae I don’t know how to
capture the supernatural conviction of déja ou, a amt atlctnated nor
the terror that accompanies the minor seizure as it Courses through you.
The premonitions, the event with its unnatural vision, are triggered by the
most banal things. Why the permbdtion by fear at the very conviction of

already having had a portion of experience? What verb tenses are

appropriate?

14

~

ws

¢

When I pilgrimaged to the English Cathedrals (these were probably the only
times off over the Howard years), I would always take a work of the English
or German mystics (Tauler, Theologica Germania, Julian of Norwich, Cloud
of Unknowing,etc) as much to witness the formation of the vernacular as to
hear the mystic voice. Now I take “Johnsoniana” (Boswell, Tour Journal,
p.262). Strictly speaking, that refers to Johnson's talk, but I reckon I am
using it to refer to works by Boswell as well as Johnson, and to the related
literature from the eighteenth-century to today (for I shall read my way
through the recent works too). Johnsoniana will cover a good many trips.

I have no appetite at lunch (unlike yesterday). So I mustn't generalize.

Maybe the chemotherapy is the cause?

This morning we went back to the Cathedral,but not much more was visible
or accessible. Then we climbed to Duccio’s Hall in the Cathedral Museum.
The Majesty (13 08-1311) looks much more primitive than the Martini
brothers’ renderings: the Virgin iconic; the setting filling the space (the wood
ie not the canvas?) in regular rows, no angels, canopies, or floating or flying

accoutrements.

The Virgin with the Big Eyes on the second floor (35 more steps), robust full
cheeks and knees, with an iconic child-sage, his right hand raised in
blessing and two angels in the top corners. The shoulders are set frontally

without the usual turn to her left (or right). She wears a deep brown

garment with protuberant knees, the conventional blue reserved for her
upper half. The halo is studded with black stones. The artist appears not to
be known. She sits on a red and gold bolster on top of what looks like a
trunk. Yet the eyes have it: the image is subordinated to their accusatory

stare.

We shop for postcards, presents, change money at the bank, then wait for a

taxi which doesn’t arrive. Lynn dashes uphill to find one but eventually the

police organize a car.

My left hand as well as right side of the abdomen is now swollen.

Saturday 9th September 1995

A two-hour car journey from Siena to Portofino, from Tuscany to Liguria.
Lynn is a sublime hypocrite: yesterday morning she knocked on my door c.
9 am and blurted out that she couldn't wait any longer; and then proceeded
to cover her honest impatience any number of times by insisting that she’d
been worried whether I was alright (after our activities the day before - when
I had exhibited endless stamina for walking, climbing and eating!) Not a

serious fault but a revealing denial.

Well! The drive from Siena to Liguria was magnificent - through the Tuscan

hills past Carrerra’s marble, then into Liguria, where the steep hills reach

down to the road in vestments of the virgin forest, as if no human hand or

16

history has every encroached. We drive through Rapallo and Santa

&
Margharita, the sun glistening on the sea, bays full of boats and narrow
perimeter beaches with, now, sparsely-habited hills wooing the shore. We

round each bay passing many large hotels.

Ah! the Splendido! In the black and white marble foyer we are greeted very
warmly with the exclamation, “You are staying for nine days!” The palm
tress wave in welcome, the descent to the sea is almost perpendicular. To
the right of the small bay of Portofino is an island, (Lynn says there are
monks living there) drenched with trees, in the lee of which rest a clutch of
small boats. The weather is glorious - a completely blue sky and a balmy
breeze. Within minutes we are seated at the seaboard of the dining room on
the terrace. I say to Lynn over lunch, “Neither of us has any excuse for not
relaxing totally here.” She replies “Yes, you do”. What a silly reply - a little
curse among her overwhelming bounty and thoughtfulness. The angles are
so entrancing here: the triangular angles of the island, the forked angle of
Mediterranean (I should say Ligurian) vegetation in front of me, the angle-
splay of the balcony with its green iron furniture on which I am sitting and
writing, overlooking the sea and island to my left, the vegetation in front of
me and to the right. The rooms on the fourth, top floor, have a
Mediterranean aura - cool marbles and delicate woods, white walls. We both
feel that with the pool (below the terrace restaurant) and the olive-tree walks
(above the hotel), we will not need to move far from a world which offers

everything and keeps THE WORLD at bay. Lynn’s room is next to mine with

17

its own balcony (no connecting door). We can communicate from balcony to -
balcony. Lunch: ravioli filled with sea bass, apple tart (do not translate into
English : a round rich pastry with succulent fruit) and cinnamon ice cream.
Lynn has gnocchi made with artichokes. The head waiter (as at the Park)
looks immensely distinguished, partly bald with a rim of grey hair, a deep,
sonorous voice. The sun is beating with the breeze on my face. It is as if

we've begun again: have just arrived from England: are finally - on holiday!

My parting prayers in the Chapel of the Park. First, praise and
thanksgiving. Then, forgive me my sins: O God, turn me more to you : help
me to dwell in poverty of spirit when I am tempted to indulge the
depredations of my vanity - face, hair, legs, abdomen, for I know that there
will be a lot more to endure. And help me to be accepting of the weaknesses
of others (of my own weaknesses I am very tolerant), to allow them their
insinuated and explicit aggressions, mendacity, hypocrisy. To remember ( I
want to say this to Harry) that one goes mad not when one “loses one’s
reason”, but when one is left with nothing else but one’s reason
(Chesterton?). (Yet I do not believe that God intends us to be stupid or

sentimental towards others.)

From the perimeter of the restaurant terrace, the full moon stains the
coastal waters, making a wavy silhouette of the steep precipitation of
verdura. An hour later Phoebus has sacrificed her sacred angle, moved out

to sea, washing the expanse with a silvery sheen.

Lovely dinner: consommé (no pasta, no cheese), chicken breast with a tiny

stuffing of spinach, soufflé with grand marnier, jasmine tea.

Sunday 10th September

The walkways alongside the hotel are honeyed with the sun, flanked by
olives, trees and flowering bushes, labelled, from South America and Africa.
Ancient, rugged steps lead from one level to another and the paths are
flagged, too; tiny lizards dash all around. The weather is herrlich, glorious;
the sun glistens on the milky, old olives and 'the sea is spangled in constant
variation. Topless sun-bathing around the pool by Junoesque Italians,
Germans, Americans. By comparison I feel like a little lizard darting around
in my black-trimmed white tent dress covering my thighs - the right thigh is
tremendously distorted today. I wonder whether the lymph is the disease
rather than a symptom of the disease: whether the failure of lymph
drainage in the legs is not linked to the lymphangitis in the lungs rather
than to tumour in the pelvic muscle. I have the largest, elongated black
plum in my fruit basket, with longitudinal indentation and patches of dusky

purple-white bloom over its skin.

The “island” is not an island: it is the right side of Portofino bay, a
promontory or isthmus jutting out into the sea, parallel to the coast where
the hotel lies, joined by a narrow strip of land with pastel buildings and a
tower, out of Shakespeare’s Verona. This could be sighted from the walkway

this morning.

19

This passage from Boswell rests in my mind : p.119 “JOHNSON. “Sir, Dr.
Cheyne has laid down a rule to himself on this subject, which should be
imprinted on every mind : ‘To neglect nothing to secure my eternal peace,
more than if I had been certified I should die within the days: nor to mind
any thing that my secular obligations and duties demanded of me, less than

99999

if I have been ensured to live fifty years more.” This does not provide any
indication of how to follow or realize this rule: it states the dilemma of
balance as if it were not the paradox (SK),Lynn reads this injunction as

requiring both completely accepting and completely giving: perfection

impossible for human beings.

Lynn has explored Portofino village and found a small Crusader’s Church
with three gigantic crosses. Tonight the moon was further inland with a
scarf of cloud. The President of the Senate, Carlo Conomiglia, came to greet
the President of Argentina in a reception on a walkway above the pool. The
dark-suited men and bright-suited ladies descend a flight of steps by the

pool leaving their conversation among the whispering tall bushes.

Monday 11th September 1995

We will have been abroad for a week. Both Lynn and I agreed yesterday
evening that we felt as if we’ve been here for ever, even though yesterday
was only our first full day - first night, first breakfast. Why did we both have

that strange conviction at a place where we feel at ease, no ordeal? Maybe

20

relaxation familiarizes time; pleasure turns the freshest experience into
normal expectation (constantly delighted). I have decided to take the mild

pain-killers morning and evening.

I don’t know anyone like Lynn: she has based her personality on the idea of
her own perfect benevolence, and totally rejects the inevitable equivocation
of human intention and the consequences of human action. It makes her
stupid - not intellectually stupid, but emotionally. It also shows absolutely
no understanding of the Christian notion of sin, which does not mean we
are intrinsically bad, but that there is no pure human motivation or action,
because we are part of meanings, personal and impersonal, individual and
collective, which exceed anything we have control of, and yet we are free to
turn (repent), or to turn away (to despair). Sin partakes, if you like, of the
Greek meaning of ‘fate’ or ‘destiny’ for which we take full responsibility.
“Emotionally stupid” because the attitude involves a refusal of
discrimination, a licence not to think about what one is saying, or to
respond with self-scepticism or irony when other implications are pointed
out. Instead Lynn’s ever-ready “I was only joking”, her total refusal of
culpability. Take the “You have [something to stop you relaxing totally,
supra] incident. Lynn insists self-depracatingly that she was referring to my
burden of having her, as my mother, on holiday with me. But at the time it
was uttered earnestly and with no explanation. This throws light on the
general, chronic problem: that the damage is not necessarily done when

things go wrong, but when difficulties are denied: then the damage is

Zl

|

doubled. The notion of ‘sin’ saves: it does not condemn human beings. Ah!
=
but I demystify too much} leave the veil drawn.

8.25 am Praise and thanksgiving
Balconies - have I mentioned that our rooms have balconies?
10.30 am: I am sitting on my balcony facing the sun in the east
and gazing at the echelons of coast-line towards Rapallo with a
wide berth of bleached sea opened out in front of me beyond the
Portofino promontory. Keat’s Endymion is open, too, but I am
almost too blissful to read. The balcony’s the thing: pure peace

and contemplation.

We spent this morning at Portofino harbour with its colour-splashed, tall
houses lining the square at the water-front, i cove is crammed with boats
(rat ao Cerca Chath
of all kinds. First, we visit an oratory/with two massive black marble
crosses, one of which bears a black marble Christ wearing an elaborate, gold
loin cloth. The horizontals terminate in gold and silver work studded with
blue and red jewels from which radiate spiky metal representations of flower
blooms. The rest of the oratory is plain, with a wooden barrel vault and blue
filigree architrave. As we walk around the quay, the mountains come into
view across the bay, forming a backdrop and juxtaposition to the pastel
houses with their illusionistically painted rustications, pediments and

lintels. Waiters or chefs bearing large silver bowls of food, covered with

cloths pressed to their aprons or overalls, cross the quay. The scene in its

22

operatic gusto has no depth: history has been deliberately redesigned for the
careless wealth of tourists, Italian and foreign. Even the Portofino Church,
up a steep ally in the right-hand corner of the square presents a consistently
Baroque trompe d’oeil space. With broken pediments in the aisle recesses,
painted cusps on the vault, marble-fronted piers, every surface singing
arias, staged not sacred. We take lunch in the most comfortable looking
restaurant with the vista of quayside and mountains splattered with
dwellings. Parma ham and melon, grilled sea-bass, salad, fried potatoes,
water and beer, cost over £60.00. A lot to pay for artfulness and artifice.
The shops comprising the ground level of the houses purvey Hermes,
Armagni, the most exclusive jewellery, while the free-standing stals pelfwhth
rude insistence the cheapest plastic toys, coral necklaces, small items of

linen and lace.

Land of motor bikes and scooters: it sounds like a continuous cavalcade as
the bikes accelerate up the winding cliff road in front of the hotel; noise
pollution replacing exhaust pollution, as these drill-drone machines are

substituted for vehicles banned from city centres.

We reach the limits of our knowledge rapidly when, travelling, we extend our
curiosity to the natural world: do green olives become black olives? When
are they harvested? How can oil be extracted from withered sunflowers?
Why is the moon hanging so much further inland on succeeding nights?

What is the name of the yellow butterfly? Why are Bellinis, peach juice and

23

- ie
Fa

ML.
G champagne, so named? What made Catherine of Siena a saint? sent altro,

immediately, of course.

k | Pronto, prompt, ready; / hallo (phone) subito, at once, immediately

jp - [nan

non lo so, I don’t know.

Perfect daily pattern: a long breakfast on the terrace, then a short room
retirement, then morning activity together (walk, excursion, etc) and lunch.
Afternoons solitary, resting, reading, lazy on the balcony in the sun; meeting

again at eight for drinks, dinner, spending the long hours of the night alone.
A margherita is a pearl, a snow-ball flowing bush, a cocktail, salt-rimmed
with lemon. Five dishes - olives, pistachios, mini-pizza, filberts, peeled and

Q) salted,and crisps - accompany our aperitifs. (Lynn’s request to note this)

Tuesday 12th September

I feel balmy and good: the pain killers provide a short-lived “lift”, although
they do not seem to assuage the stiffness of the thighs or the sensation of
wires tightened around my ankles. But I can put my weight equally on both
legs. I brought the Keats down to breakfast to peruse when Lynn left, but
she liked the idea and disappeared to her room deliberately so that I could
read. It is difficult with Keats (unlike Johnson, supra) not to feel that his

6) chastity killed him. (Like the heroine in Jacobsen’s Niels Lyhne,

24

of

Tuberculosis, the “cancer” of the nineteenth century, in that the meaning
and progression of the disease and its symptoms depends on the emotional
and spiritual condition of the sufferer). Difficult not to read (Endymjon Bk
11) of embracing suddenly “a naked waist”, “the honey’d tongue”, pressed on
honeyed tongue, “the fondling and kissing every doubt away”, followed by
intense grief, “Long time ere soft caressing sobs began/To mellow into
words”, as Keats’ own yearning for and grief over the impossibility of tender
sexual contact. For while I believe the erotic and sexual always expresses
the God-relation, I also think that to be able to share sexual intimacy, to be
tenderly close to another, is a fundamental challenge of human existence
(not achieved in so many otherwise passionate love affairs). Keate intimates
and veils the intercourse of Endymion and Arethusa; and I cannot help
musing over this poet who had never known another in this way. Now (Bk
III) the old man, who Endymion is to save, relates how Circe, “vulture-
witch”, fated him to cling around the dead waist of Scylla. My musing
intensifies at the inexperienced poet who can imagine the tenderest touch of
a female spirit-creature, and the most vile and threatening curses of a
supernatural, magian female. Maybe it would be more accurate to say not
that Keats died of his chastity, but of fear strangling desire, sexuality stifled
by horror, from which his cult of Apollo, physician and poet, could not heal

or save him.

The pool has a continuous artificial plash - peaceful, predictable, ambient

rhythm after the roar of scooter-vehicles. We spend the morning in a sunny

25

nook, with a sequestered perspective on the water and swimmers and the
wide-angled cypress, palm and boated seascape rising to the horizon. For
prelunch drinks, Lynn treats us to “Bellinis” - fresh peach juice and

champagne, beautiful pale rose concoction.

Sleep and sorrow seem the main preoccupation of Endymion and his
companions: full of enigma concerning the instantaneous event and end of
love. “Dark Paradise” (Bk IV p.144) where, also instantaneously, the
passage from the fire of hell to the cool draught of ice turns “native hell” into
this “Cave of Quietude,” does not purgate. The resonance of heaven and hell
recall Dante, but the conjuration of vast spaces, myriad choirs and classical
apostrophes, have a Miltonic magnitude. Lacking the Christian virtues,
Endymion, shepherd-prince, devoted to Cynthia (who is she?), loses his
second, dark-tressed Indian love, and he vanishes as they do. Only Peona
Endymion’s sister, remains to tell the tale. I really need the Longman
Annotated Keats to follow all this in detail.

K

Tonight the sea and sky are one in dusty blue, and the mystic promontory is

setting sail for distant shores.
Keats’ Hyperion, Bk II is clearly modelled on Paradise Lost Bk I, the

Conference of Lucifer and his followers in Pandemonium: Keats has the

sorrowful exchange of the overthrown Titons with Hyperion’s ambiguous

26

statuses between sun and earth, sovereignty and degradation, Thea and

Apollo.

Wednesday 13th September

8 a.m.

11,30 a:m.

The most violent storm all night and continuing this morning:
lightening, thunder growling continuously, endless rain, wind
shouting up and down the scale and rattling the balcony doors,
darkness at dawn. The palm trees have turned into monstrous
insects throwing their atennae in different directions at the
wind.

No sign of abatement. A long pencil of lightening right across
the sky, followed immediately by three cannon of thunder.

The storm has relaxed; the air brightened. The wind is still
high: the heads of the palms are now primitive creatures of the

sea bed, their tentacles restlessly competing for passing prey.

Lunch: malt whiskey, consommé, luigini pasta Genovese (with pesto),

cucumber salad with lemon, a large quantity of black and white grapes,

which I wash, wrap in the large, matt,pink,linen table napkin and convey to

my room. They settle immediately into my fruit basket.

Over lunch Lynn says that she would “come back as a man” “a rich man”

spending power (above all), opportunity, fulfilment and high income. It is

interesting, not surprising, I suppose, that the “success” of her two eldest

27

daughters makes no impression on her idea of her next-life prospects. By

“success” I suppose I mean independence and creativity, but, in addition,

“success” could be reckoned in more worldly terms as financial security,

professional status, celebrity, influence. Lynn’s projections are fixed in her

era and in her sense of opportunities actually destroyed by her parents

against whom she could not rebel.

The wild weather seems to have eliminated the motor scooters.

9.30

The sun is beating down again and the residents have started to
emerge from their rooms. I can see guests clad in the hotel's
roomy and thick, blue towelling dressing gowns with white trim,
taking tea on the terrace four flights below me. It is easy to
think of this as a rest-home, a Magic Mountain, a Ligurian
Davos, for the abominably wealthy. I would like it if the terraces
of walkways, with exotic plants from all over the world, were the
Terrestrial Paradise, or at least the lower cornices of Purgatory.
But somehow I am doubtful: the bearing of the waitors
indicates both the quality of their service and the potential
viciousness of the wealth they face to face. There is no love of
the neighbour here: with any slight cause for complaint, the
clientele turn on the hotel staff with unrestrained fury. The
terraces may well be circles of hell, the olive trees growing

horizontally over the path, hiding the implanted souls of the

28

avaricious, the gluttonous, the carnal, who disported themselves
as if their privilege were a true human nobility, a species of
superior virtue. The two head waiters divide this burden
between their carriage and character: the distinguished older
man whose whole body bends graciously towards whoever he is
addressed by, addresses, serves,and the younger, dark-haired
man with the strong, cruel features, whose being is completely
absent from his suave smiles and hard posture.

11 p.m. Well I underestimated Luca, the cold maitre d’. He revealed a
spleen at the British, occasioned by Michael Winner’s churlish

etark He Splerser

article/in last Sunday’s Sunday Times. Lynn and I plan to write

a response and have it faxed by the Hotel to the Sunday Times.

Thursday 14th September 1995

The damp and rainy but windless morning has been taken up with meeting
the Manager, Maurizio Saccani, and sending the fax replying to Michael

Winner to The Sunday Times.

I am loving the syntax and vocabulary of Cary’s translation of Dante’s
Purgatory (encouraged by Pite’s excellent argument that the enjambment
created by the syntax forms some kind of equivalent, or analogy, to Dante’s

terza rima).

29

In this inhospitable weather the hotel is barricaded by the Avenging Angel:
the corridors resound with loud footsteps and voices; the guests, swathed
in heavy clothes, spend the morning in the elegant lounges with rough
paperbacks held in front of bespectacled faces, wrinkled in disdain at
reading and rain; the foyer is filled with volleys of animated Italian. A
superficial community of strangers is forged as the restriction of the daily
devotions to sun, air and water make a crowded railway carriage out of this

spacious leisure palace. How to break the hold of the Angel?

I have climbed from Purgatory to Paradise. Goose liver (foie gras) and fillet

steak for dinner.

Friday 15th September

It promises to be a clear and fresh day: resplendent wide-angled sea. We
plan to visit Santa Margherita Ligure (named after the white-flowering bush).
I seem to have less and less conversation, even desire to speak, taciturnity
together with my loss of appetite: I could barely eat breakfast, normally my
“best” meal. Poor Lynn: such a companion! She needs someone fit and
active, who enjoys newspapers and television, and who chats breezily about
whatever comes into their head. Luca regales us now with winks
punctuating his sentences: one side of his face contorts to produce a fold
around the right eye so that he can press together forehead and cheek. We
must accept his gifts for they are the return for our gesture to The Sunday

Times. He is preparing calves’ liver specially for me this evening. This, a

30

man whose features form a set facade for the buried soul, produces a Grand
Guignol - in gratitude for our response to communicated damage. He has
become a short story to me: someone with acclaimable looks and urbane
nonchalance, who would be incapable of forming personal connections, and
who would disappear into the air when the guests are not there (Henry

James has a short story, I seem to remember, along those lines).

I have a wonderful writing chair in my room. It has a very low splayed seat,
with a rich tan wooden frame and complicated pattern of pale, criss-cross
thatching. The front of the seat has straight sides with a central bow rim.
The narrow concave back has two cross supports, the upper one inlaid with
an elaborate bronze representation of two long-beaked birds backing onto an
umm over a swag or festoon of material. Best of all, this ancient chair is
broken in two places: at the top left shoulder, a jagged crack in the wood;
but the lower back horizontal is completely severed on the right. A
venerable piece of furniture, this wounded companion is utterly at odds with
the immaculate marble floors, lamps and console tables, which grace the
public circulation. (How weak are words.) I'd like to take this chair with
me. The secret of writing freely with discipline is the same as speaking a
foreign language: one should not try to translate (here one’s impressions
into words), but draw on the idiomatic resources of the second language
(here: language as such) to capture something special which you want to

am
describe (ideally altogether).

31

Santa Margherita: another facade-town, with a large esplanade lined with
hotels and restaurants and a dramatic view beyond the harbour of the
Ligurian coast travelling south. The food shops gives us more of a sense of
Italian life: meats, breads, cheeses. The motor-scooters drone away
everywhere, backdrop to the Baroque Basilica, with gold inlay piers and
illuminated vault; and lugubrious aisle paintings, framed with pediments so
broken they have turned into volutes This is a heretical church, surely, its
presentation of heavenly beauty forgetful of the humanity of Christ crucified
(Lynn). We have an excellent pizza for lunch, and taxi back to the Hotel.
The combination of seaside resort and Counter-Reformation is prodigiously

disorienting.

Have I mentioned that Lynn goes on afternoon excursions, exploring the
different routes around and up and down the steep coast? The hotel is
populated by couples, often two couples together, older people on the whole.
The main shape of doorways and windows is the high round arch against

the dark pink walls with green iron balconies and shutters on four floors.

Over lunch, Lynn, quite fairly, asks if, or, rather, tells me that, “You haven’t
achieved much in Santa Margherita”. What was I meant to achieve? |
certainly enjoyed strolling around. It is a reasonable comment on my

minimalism.

32

Oh, the romantic melancholy of the hotel room in the early evening light:

the Italian version by comparison with Hopper’s American version.

Prayer: O Lord, forgive me my sins (- the same two categories as before, only
in reverse priority): help me to accept others; relieve me of my vanity.
Wonderful dinner: consommé with a host of little stars (stelline), calves liver

seared, roasted vegetables, cassata.

Saturday 16th September

Why, why does Dante give St. Bernard the last word? Can this be the
meaning of “Comedy”? - so contradictory a figure epitomising and
summarizing all the “lower” juxtapositions of worldly vainglory and eternal
love? What was Dante’s view of the Crusades? Do we know? Would he
have read St. Bernard’s Sermons on the Song of Songs, or, especially, his
treatises on Mary (etc.)? How well known were Bernard's works (as opposed

to his life - his preaching of the Second Crusade)?

We take the walkway at midday to Portofino Harbour: a flagged pavement
with a wet stone retaining wall to the right overhung with brilliant purple
bougainvillaea. The changing view over harbour, bay and the sheer cliffs
with the hotel and other colourful hotels lower sown ii the final drop
to the sea, is refreshing and easy. The restaurants in the harbour are fully

booked, but we find a comfortable table in an unpretentious one, and relish

tomatoes, anchovies, nicoise (so named after Nice - Lynn), the best pizza

33

Cr)

dough with “smashed” olives (olive paste). The solid woman who serves us
provides a casual and earthy contrast to the form and uniforms at the Hotel.
The peasant women selling linen, lace, coral, at stalls charge exorbitant
prices, which vary hugely and can be bargained down, but their faces are set
and faded, indicating the long, tough life beyond the merry-go-rounds of the

fairground of Portofino.

There are certainly wasps in the Terrestrial Paradise (Nabokov, Ada).I have
almost achieved a languid indolence this slow, deliciously warm afternoon
on the balcony, but the air is ravished for two hours by what sounds like a
giant’s lawn-mower; and the scooters seen to be racing each other up the
cornice. I love the sound of the tennis balls firmly lopped back over the net
in lengthy valleys, (which means, of course, that the players are not seeking
over exertion or competitive excitement (Lynn)). A life devoted to sensual
pleasure - sun, food, drink - reduces people to their lowest common
denominator. Does it? Dogs bark across the hillside in the dusk, another

bane to bear in this Terrestrial Paradise.

Dinner: consommeé with stelline (“little stars”), baked sea bass with pinenuts
and black olives, boiled Italian rice, bitter chocolate mousse in a bark of

madeleine, sailing in a vanilla bea with a deep sea swell of —_

tea/ (T.S. Eliot)

34

Sunday 17th September

It is quiet, still, peaceful, this Sunday morning (no scooters). We sit at a
table in the warm air at breakfast, and the gentle sun comes to share the
repast. How | like sitting up at a table; it makes me alert and receptive.
Lynn will go to the service at the Church of Divo Martini in Portofino. I will
not join her: I could not bear being a tourist (religiously speaking) at a truly
sacramental Church. I am very reluctant to leave Breakfast : it holds the

day in its generous embrace.

I love the argent glistening of the rippling sea; it seems to suggest a

subaqueous Beloved who receives the repeated caress.

Tall Bordeaux glasses for old wine; gigantic glasses with a huge bulbous

swelling for old Burgundian wine.

Walnuts individually peeled by hand for a Lugurian pasta sauce.

The sunset is dappled deep pink and violet at the horizon: it bids us an

emphatic farewell.

35

Monday 18th September

rc
The sun in the east over Santa Magherita pours its ice-gold over the drifting

sea.
Praise and Thanksgiving.

I return with all the gifts - places, sins, irony.

This document has been made available with the 36 (c) @) (=)

permission of Howard Caygill, literary executor, on
behalf of the Estate of the late Gillian Rose.